#418 config profile support (#554)
eclipse/microprofile-config: spec/src/main/asciidoc/configprofile.asciidoc

//
// Copyright (c) 2020 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation
//
// See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
// information regarding copyright ownership.
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.
// Contributors:
// Emily Jiang

[[configprofile]]
== Config Profile

Config Profile indicates the project phrase, such as dev, testing, live, etc. 
=== Specify Config Profile

> The config profile can be specified via a system property `mp.config.profile`. It can be set when starting your microservice, e.g.

Reviewer: I think we can add that only one valid profile is active at a time.

[source, text]
----
java -jar myapp.jar -Dmp.config.profile=testing
----

=== How Config Profile works

> In supporting the Config Profile, the config property names will need to start with the naming convention of `%configProfile%`, (e.g. `%live%vechile.name`).

Author: I thought about this. If we use %%, we can clearly demonstrate the profile. In your scenario, when you do the lookup, you will use `@ConfigProperty(name="config.key")`. Basically Quarkus use % and . to separate the profile name. I think starting and ending with % is better.

> In supporting the Config Profile, the config property names will need to start with the naming convention of `%configProfile%`, (e.g. `%live%vechile.name`).

Reviewer 2: No, we don't use `%` as a separator.  We prepend it on to the profile name and use that as a config segment.  This means that we only have one separator which is `.`.  Anyway I think MP ought to standardize working approaches rather than invent new ones.  Is anything else using this double `%` strategy?

> In supporting the Config Profile, the config property names will need to start with the naming convention of `%configProfile%`, (e.g. `%live%vechile.name`).

Reviewer 3: There is a typo in the document: `vechile` != `vehicle`

> In supporting the Config Profile, the config property names will need to start with the naming convention of `%configProfile%`, (e.g. `%live%vechile.name`).

Author: This is the first occurrence of this kind of naming convention as far as I know. Personally I feel %xxx% is standing out :o.

> In supporting the Config Profile, the config property names will need to start with the naming convention of `%configProfile%`, (e.g. `%live%vechile.name`).

Reviewer 2: Remember that our goal isn't to stand out. AFAIK our goal is to standardize existing best practices, and all existing implementations of this functionality use `%profilename.` as a prefix.

> In supporting the Config Profile, the config property names will need to start with the naming convention of `%configProfile%`, (e.g. `%live%vechile.name`).

Reviewer 3: I stand with @dmlloyd in this one. It's better to not deviate from working solutions

> In supporting the Config Profile, the config property names will need to start with the naming convention of `%configProfile%`, (e.g. `%live%vechile.name`).

Reviewer: Maybe I'm already biased, but %[profile].[key] seems more readable than %[profile]%key

> In supporting the Config Profile, the config property names will need to start with the naming convention of `%configProfile%`, (e.g. `%live%vechile.name`).

Author: By the way, the spec has no obligation to adopt the existing implementation. It can come up with different alternatives or completely different designs to address the same problems. This is the practices we have been using. For this matter, since you three are from the same project, I think it is good idea to hear what others think, especially users.

> In supporting the Config Profile, the config property names will need to start with the naming convention of `%configProfile%`, (e.g. `%live%vechile.name`).

Reviewer 4: This discussion follows in the new comment thread: https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config/pull/554/files#r419090888

> For an instance, a config source can be specified as follows.

Reviewer: Would it be possible to override profiles even if they are active?

Author: Do you mean during the running you could do `System.setProperty(mp.config.profile, "testing")`? I think this profile should only be looked up on microservice starting to avoid headaches.

Author: If you mean another config source with higher ordinal also contains the same config property `%live%vechile.name`, the value of `%live%vechile.name` will be taken from a configsource having a higher ordinal.

Reviewer: In the case where you have a higher ordinal with just `vehicle.name`. Will the profile always take precedence no matter the ordinal?

Reviewer 2: That's a trick question! :wink:

No existing implementation works that way.  Profile keys should only take precedence over configuration keys from the same or lesser configuration source otherwise users can have some truly surprising behavior.

Reviewer: Yes, that is why I'm asking, so we can clarify it in the spec.

Author: > In the case where you have a higher ordinal with just vehicle.name. Will the profile always take precedence no matter the ordinal?
The profile should always take precedence no matter the ordinal because of the config name rules. If multiple config sources contain the same profile config (e.g. `%live%vehicle.name`), the config value from the highest ordinal wins.

Reviewer 2: That's the opposite of how SmallRye and Quarkus work and it means that overriding config properties with system properties won't work if the original property is in a profile. Why would you do it this way? Do you know of some existing implementation that does things this way?

Author: Let's take an example of defining `%live%vehicle.name` in microprofile-config.properties and then in Kubernetes deployment file, Todd, a devops engineer, defines an environment variable '_live_vehicle_name` to override the value, I would expect the value from environment variable wins. By the way, as mentioned earlier, what we defined here should not be limited by the existing implementation.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @Emily-Jiang that it's possible to overwrite properties in a profile with other properties in the same profile, no issue there. But the question is which of the approaches is better.

It's probably easier to maintain configuration if properties in a profile only override properties in the same config source. Otherwise it can be a huge mess to make sure that profiles are clearly defined.

On the other hand, there's a perfectly good usecase for overriding properties defined in all config sources. For example, if I have a custom config source that only defines properties in profiles. E.g., the default config is in a database and profile-specifc configs are in a file (or more files, e.g. one per profile).

I prefer to keep things simple and allow that profile properties override base properties only in the same config source. Or in all config sources with the same ordinal, although that might be awfully confusing.

Reviewer 4: Overriding properties only in the same config source is also more efficient in the most cases. Here's some comparison of the number of requests to config sources for various cases (N is the number of config sources):

| Case        | across all config sources           | only in the same config source  |
| ------------- |:-------------:| -----:|
| config source with **highest** ordinal contains **profile** property      | 1 request | 1 request |
| source with **highest** ordinal contains **normal** property, only source with the **lowest** ordinal contains **profile** property       | 2xN      |   2 |
| source with the **highest** ordinal contains **normal** property, no source contains profile property | 2xN      |    2 |
| source with the **lowest** ordinal contains **profile** property, no other source contains profile or normal property | N      |    2xN |
| **no source** contains profile or normal property | 2xN      |    2xN | 
| only source with the **median** ordinal contains **profile** property, no other source contains profile or normal property  | N/2      |    N | 
| only source with the **median** ordinal contains **normal** property, no other source contains profile or normal property  | N + N/2      |    N | 

Mediam ordinal means that if you order sources from highest ordinal to lowest, the one in the middle has median ordinal.

Author: @OndroMih Thanks for the explaination and I understood what you meant. I think we are in agreement
profile properties override base properties only in the same config source. 
yields 
profile properties with a higher ordinal override base or other profile properties

Author: I'll update the spec wording to state "profile properties override base properties only in the same config source."

[source, text]
----
%dev%vehicle.name=car
%live%vehicle.name=train
%testing%vehicle.name=bike
----

> In the above config source, if the system property `mp.config.profile` is set to `dev`. The `vechileName` in the following snippet will be resolved to be `car`.

Reviewer: I think we need to clarify what happens if you activate a profile and search for a key that doesn't have a profile value. Expected behaviour will be to fallback to the key without profile.

Reviewer 4: This is resolved now that we've added this section:

> Conforming implementations are required to search for a configuration source with the highest ordinal (priority) that provides either the property name or the "profile-specific" property name. 
> If the configuration source provides the "profile-specific" name, the value of the "profile-specific" property will be returned. If it doesn't contain the "profile-specific" name, the value of the plain property will be returned. 
> A "profile-specific" property name is defined as a property whose name consists of the following sequence: `% <profile name>.<original property name>`.

Similarly, it will be `train` if the `mp.config.profile` is set to `live`, `bike` if the profile is `testing`.

[source, text]
----
@Inject @ConfigProperty(name="vehicle.name") String vechileName;
----

> 

Reviewer 2: We need some normative text covering what conforming implementations are required to do.

Reviewer 5: Detailed description of resolution rules and interplay between ordinals and other config sources are needed here and these rules also tested within the TCK.

Author: +1 @smillidge , I will add more TCKs for the config source ordinal rules once we are happy with the rules. See here for more explaination.

//
// Copyright (c) 2020 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation
//
// See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
// information regarding copyright ownership.
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.
// Contributors:
// Emily Jiang

[[configprofile]]
== Config Profile

Config Profile indicates the project phase, such as dev, testing, live, etc. 
=== Specify Config Profile

> The config profile can be specified via a system property `mp.config.profile`. It can be set when starting your microservice, e.g.

Reviewer 4: We should also allow builders to set the profile for the Config they are building. Using a system property is nice on a global level but it doesn't make sense if an application uses a custom config or even more custom configs. 

A new method like this in `ConfigBuilder` would allow it:

```
ConfigBuilder withProfile(String profileName)
```

Reviewer 2: It ought to be possible to set the config profile via a configuration property IMO.

Author: Since when reading config sources, we need to figure out the config profile value. Using system properties is much simplier. What will happen if set different value for `mp.config.profile` in different config sources, which makes the situation very complicated.

Reviewer 2: Highest config source wins, as usual.  We do support self-configuration in other areas, so I don't think this is so unusual.

> The config profile can be specified via a system property `mp.config.profile`. It can be set when starting your microservice, e.g.

Author: updated

[source, text]
----
java -jar myapp.jar -Dmp.config.profile=testing
----

> The property is only read once on microservice starting. Any changes after that is ignored. Furthermore, the value is a singular. If it contains a comma, such as `testing, live`, 

Author: updated

> The property is only read once on microservice starting. Any changes after that is ignored. Furthermore, the value is a singular. If it contains a comma, such as `testing, live`, 

Author: reworded.

> if value of `mp.config.profile` is `testing, live` as a single profile instead of two profiles.

Author: updated.

//
// Copyright (c) 2020 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation
//
// See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
// information regarding copyright ownership.
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.
// Contributors:
// Emily Jiang

[[configprofile]]
== Config Profile

Config Profile indicates the project phase, such as dev, testing, live, etc. 

> === Specify Config Profile

Reviewer 6: Why not use the term which is established in JavaEE: ProjectStage ?

This also has the benefit, that there is always a ProjectStage. Even if you don't specify any, you'll fallback to Production. This allows the following neat use case:

> myproject.security.enabled.Production=true
> myproject.security.enabled=false

Which means: enable security in production, but have it disabled anywhere else.

Reviewer: In my opinion, `profile` seems to be a more "popular" term to specify the configuration. It is used by Spring for instance.

Is there any particular reason why EE went with `ProjectStage` instead of `Profile`?

Author: I think I will stick with `profile` for now.

Author: I will keep `profile` for now.

The config profile can be specified via the property `mp.config.profile`, which can be set in any of the configuration sources. The value of the property can contain only characters that are valid for config property names. 
This is because the name of the profile is directly stored in the name of the config property. It can be set when starting your application. e.g.

[source, text]
----
java -jar myapp.jar -Dmp.config.profile=testing
----

> The value of the property `mp.config.profile` shouldn't be updated after the application is started. It's only read once and will not be update once the `Config` object is constructed. If the property value of `mp.config.profile` is modified afterwards, the behavior is undefined and any changes to its value made later can be ignored by the implementation. 

Reviewer: be update -> be updated

Author: updated

The value of the property `mp.config.profile` specifies a single active profile. Only one profile can be active at a time. Commas in the value have no special meaning. For example, if the value of `mp.config.profile` is `testing,live`,  a single profile named `testing,live` is active instead of two active profiles. 

> If the property `mp.config.profile` is specified in multiple config sources, the value of the property is determined following the same rules as other configuration properties, which means the value in the config source with the highest ordinal wins.

Reviewer 6: This information is redundant. Standard rules are, well ... standard ;)

Author: In the earlier conversation, it was asked for clarification. If we treat this `mp.config.profile` exactly same as other properties, we can just say the rules on config property applies.

Reviewer: I think we should be consistent and "eat our own dog food" :)

> === How Config Profile works

Reviewer 7: This section isn't as clear as I'd hope. The way I understand it profiles do not have an effect beyond their source. If a source has either the original property or the profile specific property and the highest ordinal it wins (as usual) whereby naturally the profile specific property (if present) does override the original property value within that winning source.

Author: @jbee your undestanding is correct. Within the same config source, the active profile specific property overrides the original property value. Overall, the property from the highest ordinal wins no matter whether it is the original property or the active profile property.

The configuration property that utilizes the Config Profile is called a "profile-specific" property. A "profile-specific" property name consists of the following sequence: `% <profile name>.<original property name>`.

Conforming implementations are required to search for a configuration source with the highest ordinal (priority) that provides either the property name or the "profile-specific" property name. 
If the configuration source provides the "profile-specific" name, the value of the "profile-specific" property will be returned. If it doesn't contain the "profile-specific" name, the value of the plain property will be returned. 

> For an instance, a config source can be specified as follows.

Reviewer: Remove `an`?

Author: well spotted

[source, text]
----
%dev.vehicle.name=car
%live.vehicle.name=train
%testing.vehicle.name=bike
vehicle.name=lorry
----

A config property associated with the Config Profile can be looked up as shown below.

[source, text]
----
@Inject @ConfigProperty(name="vehicle.name") String vehicleName;
----

[source, text]
----
String vehicleName = ConfigProvider.getConfig().getValue("vehicle.name", String.class);
----

> If the property `mp.config.profile` is set to `dev`, the property `%dev.vehicle.name` is the Active Property. An active property overrides the properties in the same config source. 

Reviewer 6: This is exactly the other way around as any other established solutions do it. Everyone else is using postfixing, e.g. vehicle.name.dev. The reason is the following: 
* you can easily group configuration that way
* you can have multiple lookup paths e.g. a dev.oracle and dev.postgres postfix.

Author: I think prefix or postfix both works. SmallRye Config went with prefix. I think what you listed above can be done using prefix as well.
`%dev.vehicle.name` stands out more than `vehicle.name.dev` though.

Reviewer: The issue with postfixing is that since a profile name can be anything you can encounter clashes. So `vehicle.name.something`, how do I know if `something` refers to a profile and I should set up `vehicle.name`, or it is an actual property I should setup `vehicle.name.something.something`?

//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.
// Contributors:
// Emily Jiang

[[configprofile]]
== Config Profile

Config Profile indicates the project phase, such as dev, testing, live, etc. 

=== Specify Config Profile

The config profile can be specified via a system property or an environment viable `mp.config.profile`. It can be set when starting your microservice. The value of the property can contain only characters that are valid for config property names. 
This is because the name of the profile is directly stored in the name of the config property. e.g.

[source, text]
----
java -jar myapp.jar -Dmp.config.profile=testing
----

> The property `mp.config.profile` is only read once on microservice starting. Any changes after that is ignored. Furthermore, the value specifies a single profile. Only one profile can be active at a time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The property `mp.config.profile` shouldn't change after the JVM is started. It's only read once during JVM start up. If the property is modified afterwards the behavior is undefined and any changes to its value made later can be ignored by the implementation. Furthermore, the value specifies a single profile. Only one profile can be active at a time.
```

We shouldn't refer to "microservices" which is a vague term and not all MP implementations are used to build microservices. Rather I'd refer to a running JVM instead of a microservice.

Author: updated.

Author: I had  a further thought on this. I am going to change to application starting instead of JVM startup as it is more accurate to say application starting due to some application server might have multiple applications installed on the same server.

Reviewer: How about on Config creation?

Author: > How about on Config creation?

This will be from implementation point of view though, which is different from user perspective. Some implementations might create the config a lot earlier.

Reviewer 2: We can all agree that the profile is read one time.  But it doesn't make sense to specify exactly when it must be read; all we can really say for sure is that the implementation will (of a necessity) read the profile property before the application reads or injects configuration properties.  Since that's all the spec can reasonably require, that's exactly what should be specified.  Obviously this doesn't happen during JVM startup; it might not happen during application startup either.

// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.
// Contributors:
// Emily Jiang

[[configprofile]]
== Config Profile

Config Profile indicates the project phase, such as dev, testing, live, etc. 

=== Specify Config Profile

The config profile can be specified via a system property `mp.config.profile`. It can be set when starting your microservice. The value of the property can contain only characters that are valid for config property names. 
This is because the name of the profile is directly stored in the name of the config property. e.g.

[source, text]
----
java -jar myapp.jar -Dmp.config.profile=testing
----

The property `mp.config.profile` is only read once on microservice starting. Any changes after that is ignored. Furthermore, the value specifies a single profile. Only one profile can be active at a time.
Commas in the value have no special meaning. For example, if the value of `mp.config.profile` is `testing,live`,  a single profile named `testing,live` is enabled instead of enabling two profiles. 

=== How Config Profile works

> In supporting the Config Profile, the config property names will need to start with the naming convention of `%configProfile.`, (e.g. `%live.vehicle.name`).

Reviewer 4: Do you realize that `%` is not allowed in some config sources, e.g. in environment variable names? For environment variables, the "profile" property would need to be specified using `_` instead of `%`, such as: `_live_vehicle_name`. I'm not sure if it would cause any problems but we should think about it.

Reviewer 2: It hasn't been a problem for us; generally users have not seemed to have needed to use env vars (or system properties for that matter) to override profile-specific properties.

Reviewer 5: However if it is to be usable in all Config Sources then perhaps we should think of a different identifier.

Author: If it is specified as environment variables, it will be transformed from % to _. It is same as other config properties.

Reviewer 4: Since environment variables would map `%` to  `_`, can't we just use `_` as the prefix also for system properties instead of introducing a new special character `%`? Implementations can support alternative notations like using `%`, no big deal. But a standard notation `_configProfile.property` would be more consistent with the current MP Config specification and wouldn't introduce a new special character.

Reviewer 4: For the record, the profile property names were discussed here: https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config/pull/554#discussion_r409668376 and this thread continues that discussion.

For an instance, a config source can be specified as follows.

[source, text]
----
%dev.vehicle.name=car
%live.vehicle.name=train
%testing.vehicle.name=bike
vehicle.name=lorry
----

A config property associated with the Config Profile can be looked up as follows.

[source, text]
----
@Inject @ConfigProperty(name="vehicle.name") String vehicleName;
----

[source, text]
----
String vehicleName = ConfigProvider.getConfig().getValue("vehicle.name", String.class);
----

If the system property `mp.config.profile` is set to `dev`, the property `%dev.vehicle.name` is the Active Property. An active property overrides the properties in the same config source. 
In more details, if the system property `mp.config.profile` is set to `dev`, the property `%dev.vehicle.name` overrides the property `vehicle.name`. 

> The properties `%live.vehicle.name` and `%testing.vehicle.name` are inactive config property and don't override the property `vehicle.name`.

Author: updated.

> In more details, on setting the system property `mp.config.profile` is set to `dev`, the property `%dev.vehicle.name` is the active property. The `vehicleName` is `train`.

Author: updated.

> On setting the system property `mp.config.profile` is set to `live`, the property `%live.vehicle.name` is the active property. The `vehicleName` is `train`. Similarly, `bike` will be the value of `vehicleName`, if the profile is `testing`.

Author: updated

> On setting the system property `mp.config.profile` is set to `live`, the property `%live.vehicle.name` is the active property. The `vehicleName` is `train`. Similarly, `bike` will be the value of `vehicleName`, if the profile is `testing`.

Author: updated

> When retrieving the config values, this Config spec implementations must first search for the value of `mp.config.profile` and then retrieve the value of the config property `%${mp.config.profile}.vehicle.name`,

Reviewer 2: I don't think that using the proposed property expansion syntax here is a good idea, since that proposal has not yet been accepted; I think it would just be confusing.  Also, I don't think this counts as "normative" since it's really an example.

I would add some wording like:

> Conforming implementations are required to return the value of the "profile-specific" property name whenever the "profile-specific" property name occurs within a configuration source whose overall priority¹ is equal to, or higher than, the value corresponding to the original property name (if any).  A "profile-specific" property name is defined as a property whose name consists of the following sequence: `%` \<profile name> `.` \<original property name>

Add the footnote for "overall priority" because configuration source ordering is more complex than just ordinal value.  That definition should be specified & linked from here.

Author: I removed the property expansion syntax but reworded slightly. Please double check to see whether it is understandable.

with the consideration of config source hierarchy specified via ordinal. It means if more than one config source contains the same property `%${mp.config.profile}.vehicle.name`, 
the value from the config source with the highest ordinal will be used. In the same config source, the property `%${mp.config.profile}.vehicle.name` overrides the config property `vehicle.name`. 

> If no value is found, the value of the config name `vehicle.name` will be retrieved.

Reviewer 4: I think all this is too complicated. I suggest to describe the algorithm as follows:

> Conforming implementations are required to search for a configuration source with the highest ordinal (priority) that provides either the property name or the "profile-specific" property name. If the configuration source provides the "profile-specific" name, the value of the "profile-specific" property will be returned. If it doesn't contain the "profile-specific" name, the value of the plain property will be returned. A "profile-specific" property name is defined as a property whose name consists of the following sequence: `% <profile name> . <original property name>`

Reviewer 5: So does the search stop if the highest ordinal config source returns a non-profile specific value for the property?

Reviewer 4: Yes, that's the idea. We discussed this in this thread: https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config/pull/554/files#r409673972. And agreed that "profile properties override base properties only in the same config source.". So the search can stop with the highest ordinal config source that provides the property, even if it's a non-profile specific property.

This is more efficient to implement. It's also less confusing for users because it's easier to find a profile-specific property that overrides the default value because it has to be in the same config source.

Author: I rephrased as @OndroMih suggested.
